David I've always wanted to understand
Ultimate Reality sometimes that's a
silly idea to be able to think that you
can do something like that and your book
the fabric of reality really made a
profound effect on me because it showed
that there is progress that one possibly
could make so how did you do that what
are the elements of the fabric of
reality
it's about what's fundamental and more
specifically about the most fundamental
things that we know uh I I don't attempt
to find Ultimate Reality because I think
that's a kind of chimera it's we always
should start with problems and start
with what we know and then try to make
it more fundamental than that
and what I call fundamental a
fundamental idea
is one that is needed in the explanation
of many other ideas or many other
phenomena and so on and the most
fundamental ones we know are basically
the ones that are needed in the
explanation of practically everything
and I wrote the the fabric of reality
because I realized that the most
fundamental theories that which are
therefore that I picked out as being the
most fundamental
um formed a sort of unified
um the fabric of reality a conception of
the world where none of them could be
understand and understood without the
other three and they were uh the quantum
physics which is my actual field and
then the theory of evolution the theory
of computation and the theory of
knowledge which is usually not even
considered part of science but those
were the the four strands now just
seeing that for the first time one's
impression are these are each important
things but they're radically different
categories uh even in type or orders of
magnitude and so it sounds like they're
all interesting but but they don't
necessarily fit together yes they seem
at first sight to be different kinds of
thing uh three out of the four seem to
be tied to us humans or to life on Earth
or something while the fourth is
universal but the closer you look at
these four uh theories branches of of
knowledge strands of the fabric strands
of the fabric of reality the more you
realize that you can't understand any of
them without the others they're all
intimately related
give me a quick synopsis of each of the
four so the quantum physics is one of
the two fundamental theories of physics
it is the the
language in which all other theories are
written the other fundamental theory is
Einstein's theory of relativity which
describes space and time quantum theory
is the language that all other theories
in physics are expressed in and it's
sort of constrains the kinds of ideas
that one can Express within physics it's
the the deepest and most successful
Theory the evolution and then so the
theory of evolution is uh the theory of
how it's it's uh uh the the basic theory
of emergent properties it's how large
objects can have properties can can be
understood in terms that do not follow
from their low level definitions in
terms of atoms and so uh we you we have
laws like the the principle of evolution
which is a rigorous law of Nature and in
terms of which we we the Darwin solved
one of the fundamental
mysteries of nature but it cannot be
expressed in terms of atoms
so that's that's the theory of evolution
computation and then theory of
computation is the theory of what
um processes in nature are independent
of or transcend the material substance
that they that they are embodied in so
for example
um I I can say I had an idea last year
and now I'm telling it to you and that
idea is an abstract entity that is
instantiated in uh first of all it's
instantiated in the brain then it's
instantiated in movements of my mouth
then in vibrations of air molecules and
so on and it can be instantiated in ink
on paper and and and an enormous variety
of things but in order to understand any
of those transitions you have to
understand that what is
affecting things what is moving things
here is the information itself not its
instantiations and the theory the
general theory of how information is
processed in the world is the theory of
computation and this does sound like it
leads to knowledge and that it
immediately leads to knowledge which is
um the kind of
um information that can do things so or
solve problems as we would say at the
human level but but in these terms
adaptations in living things are also a
form of knowledge so DNA embodies
knowledge human brains embody knowledge
books and computers embodied on the
internet all embody knowledge and the
thing about the knowledge that makes it
fundamental is that if you think of any
kind of transformation of a physical
system you know from hot to cold or from
a block of marble into a statue and so
on if you think about all possible
Transformations that are permitted did
by the laws of physics the overwhelming
majority of those are only only happen
if the right knowledge is present
so from the point of view of what can be
transformed into what
it's practically all the theory of what
knowledge can do and that is why
knowledge is a fundamental thing in in
the physical world does knowledge have
to have a uh a purpose a teleology a
meaning in order for it to be knowledge
the
um it it with the benefit of hindsight
one can determine that it has a meaning
because it's the meaning that keeps it
in existence one way of saying one way
of expressing the fact that knowledge is
information that does something is that
it's it's the kind of information which
once it is embodied in a certain type of
physical system it tends to remain so
and in biology that happens because its
Rivals die yeah and DNA is a good
example DNA is is representing the
fitter of the species exactly and or
rather the fitter of the genes yeah okay
and and uh with with human knowledge an
idea remains embodied in things like
books and brains to the extent that it
does something like it enlightens people
or it allows the physical world to be
manipulated or whatever but it has to
have some kind of use so integrating
those four what are the implications
where can you take it forward
um the in my first book in the fabric of
reality I just wanted to say that these
four strands are fundamental in this
sense and I wanted to say that
um you can't understand any of them
without the other three
um
and that all of them have been kind of
underestimated in that they have been
accepted as
the right explanation in their own field
but they haven't been taken seriously as
a component of people's world view
so that for instance people accept
quantum theory but they don't accept its
parallel universes implications they
other people accept the universality of
computation but they don't accept that
this implies that it's possible to
program artificial intelligence and so
on
so by integrating all of these into
basically a theory of at least current
reality
um uh how has that how do you feel about
that now and kind of with some distance
to your original creation how has it how
has it lasted well I I think it has made
me think of the world in a much more
unified way and it that's why I
eventually came around to writing the
second book which is applying this
fabric of reality to various issues
which on the face of it like the four
strands themselves don't look as though
they have anything to do with each other
or with the four strands and yet the
closer you look the more integrated they
are and the more they do have to do with
each other